Server side WebAssembly,
where variations range from 0.3
to three to 25. In this episode, we
get to chat with Mikkel about WebAssembly then
and now, Spin three point o, Wazi 0.3,
and Spin moving into a sandbox project for
the CNCF.
And Laura took her shot. She got us
talking about the enterprise,
FML.
Of course, I had to. At least we
talked about Ross. Enjoy this episode. Welcome, Mikkel.
Thank you for joining us. This is Cloud
Native Compass, and we are excited to pick
your brain on everything cloud native Fermion, WebAssembly,
and Spin.
For anyone who is not familiar with you,
Fermion, or Spin, please feel free to introduce
yourself now. Thank you, David, and thanks for
having me here. So my name is Miguel
Marc Hannait. I am Danish, which is why
you would hear that weird surname. I am
the head of product and developer relationship at
Fermi where I've been for and now I
actually don't know whether it's two or three
years. So you pick whichever one you want.
I think it's actually three years. At Fermi
we are doing
web assembly. We talk about it as the
next wave of cloud computing, which is why
it's so well aligned with the topic of
cloud native, hopefully you're gonna talk about today.
Prior to being at Fermion, I spent more
than ten years in Microsoft building various cloud
services and developer tools there, which is also
where I met Matt Adrado, who are the
founders of Fermion,
and how they sort of got involved in
all of this. Excellent. Awesome. Thank you. Now,
of course, I want to chat about Spin,
which as of November, only a few months
ago, released version three. The pace at which
that project is evolving is fantastic to watch.
But I think we should set a little
bit of context
and just talk about WebAssembly and the evolution
of that over the last three years if
you've seen it. No surprise to anyone who's
listened to this podcast before or seen any
of my YouTube stuff. I'm quite bullish on
WebAssembly.
I think it's an enabler and something that
everyone needs to start paying more attention to.
And I'd love to hear your version of
it as someone from the inside who's actively
trying to make this possible for developers to
adopt and succeed with WebAssembly.
What have those last three years been like
for you, and how is WebAssembly evolving? The
last few years, and I actually think it's
three years now that I get to think
about it. Thank you, Laura. You're keeping straight.
He actually says something about how quick time
has passed, but also how much have happened.
Like you have that weird paradox that you
feel like time just like snaps away. But
then on the other hand side, there's so
many things have happened. And I actually think
that's a good indication that a lot has
happened. We moved, we really moved forward and
just to think back to even November when
we did spin three point and where we
are today, even all has happened.
So yeah, so it's an interesting space.
I think over the last three years, the
whole ecosystem around WebAssembly
has
my first encounter with it when I joined
Fermion three years ago was just trying to
figure out what's even going on here, what's
the ecosystem trying to accomplish.
Lots and lots of really great and promising
visionary stuff,
but less practical things that were usable and
approachable for people to actually do things with.
Whereas over these three years that has really
flipped. I think a lot of the visions
has come to fruition and I hope we
get to talk about the upcoming Wazio three
as well, which is another big milestone
in what you can do with WebAssembly,
but also seeing
Spin and a lot of other projects in
the WebAssembly space,
really bringing this in the hands of developers
that it's easy to get to. There's great
developer experiences.
You can easily build applications,
manage services
popping up so it's easy for you to
actually run them. The ability to run things
in Kubernetes and really try to get WebAssembly
as a core primitive of cloud computing
in all those places where you expect to,
or where you do cloud native computing today.
And I think that's, I used the tagline,
the next wave of cloud computing when I
introduced myself. I think I did, something along
the lines. But that's really what we think
about WebAssembly
here
in the progression that we've seen from all
the way back from physical servers to virtual
servers to containers, and then being WebAssembly. And
the new kid on the block in terms
of that core primitive into how we do
cloud native things. Thanks. There's quite a lot
I feel we can dig into there. And
I'm gonna try and knock you down.
Love that, the next wave of cloud computing.
And I think we'll just, we'll leave this
here. We're gonna come back to this to
talk about how building WebAssembly applications and operating
WebAssembly applications is different from traditional container based
or VM based applications. Let's Yeah. Come back
to that for sure. But you talked about
Wazee 0.3
there. Yep. And I don't wanna be foolish,
but I'm gonna try and see. When WebAssembly
first came out, it was just the browser
based sandbox. Wazee is what brought WebAssembly to
the server. And I believe 0.1,
there was no such thing as the component
model. The runtimes all implemented their own interface
things. And then with 0.2,
the component model came along and says, actually,
let's have shared interfaces to provide shared behaviors
with different implementations.
And I believe the Fermion team was maybe
not spearheaded. Maybe you were spearheaded, but you
were definitely a major part of that conversation.
As we progress to 0.3,
is this us leading to something that is
truly ubiquitous from a WebAssembly and server side
point of view for people to adopt it
now? Because in my head in one of
the conversations I have, I'm I'm now gonna
go on for ages and chat. When I
go to conferences, I'm always going, web assembly,
and waving my hands and trying to get
people to listen to me. And one of
the major concerns is the 0.2 from the
Vazee. Isn't that too early? On opposite side
of this, we've got spend, which is on
version three, which is built on top of
Wazi zero point x. So what is the
stability here? How do we get people to
There's two questions here. One, what is 0.3?
Where is this taking us? And then it's
Are we at a stable point for people
to start kicking the tires on this stuff?
Yes, I like to think of these in
terms of, if you were to look for
stability,
you should not, so WASI is a specification,
let's start there, like WASI specification, right? And
the specification
typically has a long time to move from
releases to releases in terms of there's a
lot of alignment and agreement that needs to
happen in the ecosystem,
which I think is good because the specification
needs time to prove itself before it stabilizes,
because that's gonna end up being the foundation
where, you know, main promise of longevity
of what you end up building comes in,
promises of portability between implementations and so on
and so forth. That's where you snap that
to in terms of what the specification is.
And there are definitely scenarios where some of
that has
more impact and is more important than other
scenarios.
So if you think about the runtime implementation,
so for instance, WasmTime is one of the
most popular Wasi runtimes that exist. I think
there's a nuance to this is like how
do you even apply your versioning concepts because
wasn't time is I think version 25
or something like that, because they basically have
a way of saying every time we do
a version, we do a major version release,
and that's how you can think about the
runtime and what they do. But what most
people will end up taking a direct dependency
on would be those, the tools and the
implementations which they as developers
would write against, SPIN being one of those,
Which is a framework and a developer tool
is where you're gonna meet WebAssembly in many
cases. And there are other examples of SPIN
as well, and
more of these come up in various scenarios.
And SPIN then across its major versions,
that obviously has support for the underlying specifications,
but SPIN is I think is where that's
at least been our approach to that project
has been like, SPIN is where we're gonna
give you the promises of backward compatibility and
we have across SPIN one and two and
three, which we're at right now as the
major versions,
kept the backward compatibility
for things that we have been able to
run previously, which means you can still run
things that are not your SWSI-one
even with Spin three point zero, so if
you wrote into that specification,
that's still supported at that point.
So I think it's important for people in
terms of how they think about this, what
are the tools they're gonna implement against, what
is the direct dependency they have and do
they rely on that dependency to do the
long term support across the specification grabbing?
At least that's how I think about it
and
knowing that we are early on with some
of the specification pieces,
at least I think it's important for the
frameworks that people use directly that they help
with the promise of longer term support and
backward compatibility.
Yeah, you've just, you talking there for a
few minutes has given me a kind of
a eureka moment in my head. And I
think I'm going to condense everything you've just
said until a single sentence, and I hope
you're not too offended. But I
think from a developer standpoint,
exactly what I want is slow moving specifications
that I can trust to still be there,
but fast moving implementations that can iterate and
provide me what I need to be successful
as a developer.
Can I write that down?
I'll just say that next time, Rob.
Yeah, I've never viewed it through that lens
before, but yeah, I want my specifications to
evolve slowly
with the implementations providing that testbed to iterate
advance, test things, kick the tires and all
that. So I really like that. And even
though the Wazee specification is 0.2
moving on to 0.3, these things have been
in the works for a long time as
well. WebAssembly is not exactly a new concept.
It's been around since, I don't know just
threw out a year and hope that I'm
right. But I think it's like 2016, '20
'17, maybe I'm wrong.
That's a great question.
It is actually know what that was. Someone
should go and Google it, but yeah. No.
But you're probably right. Yeah. So I was
gonna say now I'm not as up on
WebAssembly as David is.
I'm kind of that person in the call.
But last I remember, there was a move
from building
on top of I think it was Nomad,
and now it mostly builds on top of
Kubernetes. So from, like, an operator standpoint, I'm
curious from that perspective of
has that move been a significant one? Throw
this out there. As you start thinking for
like spin four point zero and whatever's next
for web assembly, are you thinking that you'll
probably stay on Kubernetes or do you think
you might branch out to try to encourage
even more adoption?
I'm pretty sure Kubernetes is the path to
get adoption. I think if anything you will
find in most
companies that run Thing,
is that you can be pretty certain as
a developer, if you hand over a container
to your operations department, they know how to
run it. And they probably will use Kubernetes
in
95%
of the cases or something like that. So
I think that's a given for sort of
like the mass adoption.
It's true that at Fermion we did create
something we called the Fermion platform
on Nome to begin with, mainly because we
didn't see a good solution to run other
types of workers inside of Kubernetes than containers.
And that was really the main thing why
we picked up Nomad at that point in
time because Nomad are able to run even
just processes along with containers and other things
and that's how we package that.
So the big invention that happened there, was
together with, well actually Microsoft did a concept
called RunWasi
which
evolved into a way of providing a shim
for containerd, the runtime,
to not only be able to run containers
but also to run WebAssembly
natively so to speak. So you don't grab
a WebAssembly in a container, you basically run
the WebAssembly directly. And with that component,
it sort of saw like what
we didn't take on at that point in
time is you now have native WebAssembly support
in Kubernetes
by using ContainerD and using that shim,
which means that it makes so much more
sense to start running inside of Kubernetes. So
if you take that compared with the breadth
of adoption of Kubernetes,
I think that's definitely the way forward. That
makes sense.
Yeah, and to add on more context there,
just because like this is now my dream
saturation. We're talking about WebAssembly and Kubernetes, same
as it. So if we bring in some
rust Yeah. I was gonna say, where's the
rust in here? Let's go.
The reason that serverless workloads on top of
Kubernetes
sometimes have a bad time and get a
bad reputation is because in order to actually
start a container or a pod inside of
Kubernetes, there are a whole bunch of assumptions
that needs to be made. One is it
needs to speak to the CNI and get
an IP address. It needs to speak to
the Linux kernel and get C groups and
namespaces and all this stuff. Meaning that the
base or the bottom line for starting a
container is actually measured in usually hundreds of
milliseconds. Those are ways to improve that, but
hundreds of milliseconds. Yep. And for why was
something I don't think that makes sense. I
believe it's who's
always talking about the invocation of the startup
time for WebAssembly binary is measured in nanoseconds
and not milliseconds.
Yeah. That is true. Yeah. Why would you
take all of that performance improvements and throw
it away just to run it on Kubernetes?
There's There's a lot of things that need
to need to be challenged and changed there.
And I loved what the Microsoft team are
doing with to enable this because Yeah. It
provides that new bedroom, found your framework that
allows these web assembly applications to maintain
velocity
without sacrificing the runtime environment. Because Michael just
said, everyone has Kubernetes.
I don't even think Hashi corporate running Nomad
anymore. They're a bit of a keep going
too talking about Kubernetes.
So That is Yeah. I don't know. The
the fact that we can have
our stateful container based databases running side by
side with a future of hopefully WebAssembly invocations,
think is a a powerful future that we
should all be aspiring to eventually. And it's
it's just how do we get there? How
do we onboard with developers? And I'm sure
Michael's got all these answers in his back
pocket. We can dive into that. Yeah.
But how do we go from okay. We've
got last easy 0.3 coming up. Hot on
our heels. We've got spend cube now, which
is open source and released to allow these
people to run these WebAssembly workloads natively on
Kubernetes, say by say, but from everything else.
We now need to get them right in
Kubernetes application,
WebAssembly applications.
And now we're on to Spend three. Like,
why don't you give us the TLDR? Why
should people start paying more attention to spend
and what did the V3 release bring to
the table? So I think I just wanna
make a small remark on what you said
on the performance thing, because the way that
I think about that, Maya, is that
I think what we've done with Ron Wassey
and SpinCube, so SpinCube being the project that
pulls all these things together with ECHELM child
installs and then you just deploy the Spin
app, but basically it's all the underlying technology
stacked up and operators and so on and
so forth,
is we've ensured that Kubernetes is sort of
a, that a Spin application, WebAssembly can become
a first class citizen inside of Kubernetes, right?
So when you operate these in Kubernetes,
you operate them same way you would operate
the container there, which also gives you the
huge benefits that the whole ecosystem around Kubernetes
just worked with this. Last week I did
a recording of an introduction to SpinCube that
involves showing how you can just apply a
Kita scaler to your WebAssembly workloads, right? The
same way you do to your container workloads,
which is a really good example of just
fitting into the broader ecosystem, which I think
is part of the answer to getting the
adoption, right? Like the same way that operations
teams or platform engineering teams provide platforms that
support containers is really easy for them to
enable now just supporting WebAssembly inside of the
same platform that way. I think the missing
piece there to your point about performance is
work to be done to have Kubernetes being
a first class host for WebAssembly,
meaning that you actually get the full benefits
of, for instance, the scaling to zero and
starting from zero, lack of the, not the
lack of cold start, but the fact that
there hardly is any cold start going from
not having a WebAssembly component loaded and then
loading it, we've done run times in that,
around that as a commercial project for Fermiad,
where basically we can host 10,000 applications, WebExplained
applications on a single Kubernetes node, but we
can't do that in the Kubernetes model because
of pod limits and those type of things,
which means we have to break out of
that being the first class citizen. So there
is that trade off there, right? That sort
of speaks to that. But I think being
a first class citizen in Kubernetes is part
of the road to adoption. So back to
your question, David, about what we've done in
Spin three point the main things that we
have been focusing on in Spin three point
zero is this idea of WebAssembly Components. And
it's actually also a good sort of, there's
a tie back to when we talked about
WOSI three
and that being sort of the next release
of the specification.
The major, the sort of the marquee feature
that WOSI three will bring in the specification
is to be able to do
combination of async and sync programming between components.
So we might wanna talk a little bit
about what WebAssembly components are so that we
get an idea of what this is. So
WASI stands for the WebAssembly System Interface. So
it's basically a set of APIs that you
need to implement if you create a WASI
compliant runtime, which means that it's a virtual
machine, it's like an operating system, so if
you write a WebAssembly
and using these APIs, you expect that WebAssembly
to be able to run inside a WASI
compliant runtime. But WASI is also just, so
together with WSC, a way of describing those
APIs and interfaces
called WIT, which is the WebAssembly interface type
language was developed, but it actually enables you
to define your own set of interfaces and
APIs through WIT. And what's interesting about WID
is that WID operates,
well,
is meant to bridge
the same way that a WebAssembly you can
say is portable runtime because it's a byte
code format and you have this virtual machine.
What Wid enables us to do is have
the definition that the programming languages now can
understand.
So you can have a definition of an
interface that you can provide in a Rust
implementation
and
use in a JavaScript implementation,
which means that you can actually have libraries,
which is what we would normally call them
when we're in a single programming language,
from other programming language that you use in
whatever code you're writing today. And in the
WebAssembly world, we call these, when they're compiled,
we call them components. So you can implement
a WebAssembly component in a given programming language
that you can now go and use in
another WebAssembly component written in another programming language.
There's a path of this which is just
polyglot development and then it's like, well I
don't wanna break down my libraries in different
programming languages,
I use one programming language, already right. But
there's another path of this, there's another way
of telling the story, which is maybe it's
the package manager and all package managers. Like,
you know, if someone wrote a really secure
and fast Postgres driver
in
given language,
we don't have to write a Postgres driver
in all these other languages when we're using
the WebAssembly
world because we can basically just use that
component from other programming languages. So the component
model is a core focus in three point
where now between these libraries we're actually able
to combine synchronous and asynchronous functions that work
inside of each of these components,
unlocking a whole breadth of scenarios, particularly around
streams
and other things where you want to stream
data with that, I think is one of
the typical use cases that will light up
there.
Yeah.
So this means,
I haven't been keeping up with 0.3, so
this is new to me, but I'm loving
where else is going already.
This is essentially like a distributed promise across
any language
where, again, if I got an async function
in JavaScript, it does a fetch request to
our remote host, but I call that from
Rust.
It's able to handle the promise in JavaScript
for a short no response, but it's handled
at the WebAssembly
world point of view rather than in each
individual component itself. Is that correct?
Yes.
I said that like a yes and no
rather than just a yes, but. Yeah, yeah,
I don't know what the no would be,
yes. That's really cool, I like where that's
going.
The
main thing here that we've discovered is that
there are certain frameworks and programming languages that
like makes such heavy use of async. So
one of the things that people may have
stumbled upon when they've been looking into WebAssembly
is like, but there are all these things
you can't do, right?
There's probably still like garbage collection, multithreading of
things that people used to take on to,
and there's definitely things, because it's not a
full operating system, like it's not a full
DIPC
compatible thing like
people expect other places. A lot of these
frameworks just take assumptions that we're not able
to honor WebAssembly
yet, right? So it's just yet another step
on this ladder of making more, I think
really
the effect of this will be that more
stock libraries you get from your NPMs and
your cargo or your NuGet or wherever, we'll
actually just work at WebAssembly once we have
o three o working. That's really the net
effect of this. People just compile down to
one layer and everything can work together.
It makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. Just preaching
to myself here. I'm a Polyglot developer. I
don't as much as I would like to
write most things in Rust. Yeah. I definitely
appreciate having that option to jump out to
writing some goal where it's appropriate.
I like writing a lecture. I like playing
with Ponyline. I like playing with Zig. If
there's a language that's of an interest, I
generally like to play with it. And I
feel like WebAssembly
and especially Wazi and server side stuff just
allows me to sit down
and experiment with all these things. And having
spent the first ten years of my life
writing nothing but C in parallel, you get
locked into how things are done in those
ecosystems.
And it's not until you start experimenting and
playing with more languages that I feel that
I broadened as a developer and began to
pick up new patterns and new paradigms. And
I think made me a better and stronger
developer. I encourage people to look at it
from that lens. Don't just set and rate
go because the entire cloud native ecosystem is
in go. There's a lot to learn from
Lust and Elixir and Zig and all these
other really cool languages. Just this week,
I've seen a language library shared on Gab.
Someone starred it, and it was an actor
framework written in Swift.
And I like distributed systems. I like actor
based systems, and I've never played with Swift.
So I went and lost three hours of
my day just playing and taking it down.
But it's fun. You've got to find the
moments as
well when you're doing this stuff, right? That's
what stops you hopefully from burning out and
just having a smile on your face when
you do. I mean, just the diversity of
ideas that are implemented and concepts that are
implemented, just like,
I think enables you to reasoning about things
in a different way. Just like hearing other
people's opinions, which is also always inspiring.
Definitely.
Just hear that you're enabling David's Oh, Shining
Syndrome is what I'm hearing.
So
that's very classic, it's very nice. Yeah, it
is. And I thank them for it.
There's a
very specific scenario that we did
end up writing the other for a few
weeks back because someone requested it, which was
like, hey, I'm a JavaScript developer and I
wanna do something
really easy that I can ploy into low
compute environment, but I actually wanna do image
manipulation. What's a great way of doing image
manipulation in JavaScript? We can just implement a
component in Rust over here and use a
really efficient Rust library to do image manipulation,
expose the features to an interface defining bit
and now you just wrap the ACP request
in your JavaScript and you call into the
Rust component that actually does some of the
heavy lifting, right? So I think there's another
thing which is using
some of these programming languages appropriately
really easy. JavaScript is easy with ACP and
JSON,
Rust is not necessarily easy with ACP and
JSON, but it can do other things well.
So I think that's a good sort of
more down to earth practical use case
for this type of polyglot. Right. Yeah. And
if we also expand the scope a little
bit, people write servers, people write applications that
run server sites. Some people write applications that
run front end. There's desktop applications. There's mobile
applications. There's a lot of opportunity for interrupt,
but they require you to use different language.
Yes. Sure. You can use electron for desktop
and mobile on our end. But we all
like native feeling apps that work well within
each ecosystem.
Web Assembly gives us this wonderful integration point
as well where
you can have shared type definitions that can
be consumed across the entire stack, which Yeah.
I mean, I spent a lot of time
doing this with JSON schema and GraphQL and
a whole bunch of other type languages. And
then you're always compiling
the language specific assets for this. And it's
cumbersome. It's painful, especially
when you go across multiple repositories and multiple
projects and you've got versioning and distribution.
Sure.
I could throw all an MPM, but I
wanna do that. No. And I think there's
better ways now. And WebAssembly is front and
center with that regard, at least in my
opinion. So, again, I said I'm bullish. I'm
not gonna even shy away from saying that
I really like where WebAssembly is going and
more people need to be doing this. So
From an enterprise standpoint, though, it's actually very
useful because you're not really having to deal
with a lot of the how do I
chase the new thing that I need to
do and get more developers to work on
that, but I still need to maintain
all of these tools and things that I've
built that are running in older development systems
and older languages.
So you can't staff up for everything if
you have to constantly move around. Whereas if
you only had to have one person be
able to build in this, one person be
able to build in that, and they can
build different components and put it together or
one team, I should say, an enterprise is
gonna find that very useful.
So I can definitely see the value there,
especially if you're building on what is the
de facto
operation
system, which is Kubernetes right now. So that
makes perfect sense. We
talked about a lot of the component stuff
in terms of benefits
it gives to developers.
There are fun parts that you can do
on the runtime side of things as well,
and part of three point we actually released
a feature we call selected deployments, means that
you can define,
so considering the scenarios, when you write a
spin application that you can expose
individual components, it's typically HTTP endpoints, right, because
these are serverless function models, so you create
an HTTP event, an HTTP handler. Within that
handler you can take dependencies and other components
that you bring in, but you can also
split up the applications in
multiple handlers.
With selected deployments, what you can do is
now if you go and deploy this into
Kubernetes for instance, you can actually define which
components you want to deploy on various
node types or node pools inside of your
Kubernetes cluster, even if there are some of
them you don't want to deploy.
So there are lots of benefits you can
get on the runtime side once you have
things broken out into components,
one of those being this breaking up the
application. Another thing we've done as experiments in
other runtimes is de duplicating components. If you
know Windows and dot net, there's a global
assembly cache concept in dot net, I think
it's actually dot net content, it must be
outside of Windows as well. Anyways, I used
to know about it from Windows back in
the days. But basically at run time what
you can do is, let's go back to
the example of the image transformation.
Let's say 100 people deploys
applications
into your system that all makes use of
that same image transformation component, we only need
to host it one time and we actually
unin the system
and all of these applications and other components
that make use of it
will just run that. So there are lots
of great things you can do there both
in terms of less footprint at deployment time,
but going back to your enterprise scenario, Laura,
again, those things like how can you actually
patch things in the system. But you can
just upgrade that one component if there's a
security thing that needs to come in, now
all the applications are using the updated, right?
Even if it's in a distributed system and
not necessarily on a single machine. That makes
sense.
Yeah. It's a good model.
Yeah.
Use the model. I'm
just thinking in terms of massive enterprises with
lots of things going on and just only
having to fix it once and having to
stay up once to do a deployment in
the middle of the night is very nice.
Yes.
Instead of having to have four deployment windows
that I have to go deal with over
the course of a week to handle a
security vulnerability.
Alright. Let's
get away from the enterprise chat because we
we we don't wanna offend the cloud native
folks. And
no. What I'm thinking is Don't they work
in enterprises?
Yeah. Small ones. Okay. Little ones. It's not
that one. No. I don't know. Maybe it's
just my cloudy judgment. But enterprises, I hear
Java, Tomcat, scary stuff, virtual machines.
Supposed like, bed work on here. Right?
Maybe?
What? Sorry? Java. I'm just kidding. David and
just look horrified. I think she's trying to
convince you to build the web assembly Tomcat.
No. Thank you. I'm good. I'm
more just trying to horrify you, David. So,
it's all good. Anyway, what was your question?
No, I was thinking, I think we've said
lots of nice things about WebAssembly. We're seeing
momentum,
there's pace, there's philosophy, all these wonderful things
we want from a budding new ecosystem. The
next wave of cloud computing, if you will,
right?
How are Fairmount approaching the idea of getting
individual developers to say, okay, I want to
write my next thing in WebAssembly?
Because I imagine that is a challenge, right?
People are still setting their ways, we're ready
to go and ship a container, second them
onto Kubernetes.
What does it look like? How I'm assuming
you go to conferences, you speak to people,
they have the moment, but they'll think, that
seems really cool. How do you deliver that
to the individual developer? Because then I'm sure
they eventually go to an enterprise, but I
don't care. But how do you put that
smile on a developer's face? We showed them
the thing, right?
Hard to do in a podcast like this.
I think one of our taglines like sixty
six seconds from blinking cursor to deploy the
application. Like the light weight ness. I don't
even know if that's a word, but it
yeah,
after the whole thing just to have been
a I think it's enabled us to be
able to create like one of the best
developers experience I've been part of creating.
To give you some of those examples, there's
a simple CLI tool that you download, and
by the way, we didn't talk about this
yet, but both Spin
SpinCube, the project to get things into Kubernetes,
are becoming CNCF sandbox projects at the moment,
they're
the process of onboarding,
so this is now a CNCF based project.
There are other CNCF projects around WebAssembly as
well that people should go and check out.
So it's
been open source all along, but it's not
a Fermi and owned thing anymore, it's now
in the CNCF, which is super nice. You
download a CLI
and that's really all you have to do.
You don't, and you need your programming
language tool change and there are like heavy
dependencies. I know container runtimes are probably almost
everywhere again, so whether that's a heavy dependency
or not, but you still need it if
you wanna run containers, And even if you
wanna do Kubernetes stuff,
you either run K3D or micro K8s, whatever
you do locally and all of these things.
None of this is needed here. So being
able to go through that experience of having
just a CLI, writing a simple function handler,
running it locally where you could build in
key value stores and other things that we
can do again because of this whole WASI
model, like we can plug in underlying data
store implementation through those interfaces
and being able to deploy that either into
Kubernetes cluster and SpinCube or into a managed
service like Fermion Cloud, which is run these
serverless functions at scale,
That is sixty six seconds to have things
in the cloud,
which find it super, super hard to get
to anywhere elsewhere.
I know when people talk a lot about,
typically when people talk about PaaS, they always
end up referring back to Heroku
as being sort of the golden standard of
how you want to build a good developer
platform.
And I think we've actually come super, super
close to that without having to lock people
into particular programming languages or frameworks or other
things that they can do because it's all
based of WebAssembly and the standards that are
behind that. I hope some of those things
are the things that would put developers
smile on,
which I thought was part of your question
as well, David.
Definitely SpinCube
is one of those, like making it super,
super easy to have a way, place to
run these things, right? Starting to see some
enterprises experimenting with lighting up SpinCube as part
of their Kubernetes based platforms,
really just gives developers the deployment endpoint that
they need to start running these things. Yeah.
I was really hoping that you went on
the developer experience angle, and you totally did.
So that's fantastic because
you mentioned Heroku there. And I'm
old enough that I remember when Heroku deployed
or launched, and I shut my first thing.
And I didn't write a single config.
I just did a get pushed to remote.
It wasn't mine. It's the a Roku and
all of a sudden, it knew what type
of application I had. It put it into
production and it's about a URL. And that
was a moment. That was that's a eureka
moment. That's wow. Like, deploying has never been
as easy before.
And I think
for spend for me, and I can't remember
when this was or whatever, but it was
when the spend add command was added and
I was able to just add new multi
language polyglot, whatever you wanna say, components to
a single application where all the routing was
handled for me and I could invoke each
different thing
easily.
That was, oh, wow. This changes the game
because it just gets rid of so many
different challenges with RAIN applications.
And that's why we look at Kubernetes and
can you be successful with Kubernetes on its
own? But really you need service meshes and
you need server ability tools and you need
get ops and you need platform
engineering and all this stuff. And then you
get spend coming along and you just do
spend deploy and spend build and spend up.
And it doesn't matter how many components are.
It just handles that for you. And it's
like, show me a better developer experience, anyone.
Like, that's an an open challenge. Like, I
just don't think what it is. That's a
bear with Okay. I feel like we're doing
a nice journey here and we're getting close
to wrapping up.
But let's let's we'll put smiles on developer
spaces. They see the magic. And now we're
talking about productionization.
There was something that caught my eye. It
was Ben v which was the OpenTelemetry
integration. Yeah. Maybe you can share a little
bit of light on as we move to
pushing more WebAssembly into production, how important that
is and what's coming next.
Yeah, the main thing we did in Spin
three
point zero is actually to have the runtime
being
instrumenting the path to invoking your components.
So think about it as a runtime, your
app is like the guest running on top
of the runtime,
which means that out of the box, and
there's actually a, we have column plugins to
the Spin CLI, the developer experience,
so you could run a command called spin
plugin install otel,
and then when you do the local running
of your spin application, which obviously is the
command spin up,
you do spin otel up, and if you
do those commands, what you get is a
local Jager instance that just immediately shows you
the spans when you call into your WebAssembly
components, and you can start imagining how you
can see a span of the request came
in,
one component was loaded, that component called another
component, may have called a third component, and
when we get async, you can start seeing
those things coming back and you just get
all these spans and things out of the
box.
That also is translated into SpinCube, so when
you deploy things into SpinCube, can either have
a global or namespace scope or whatever your
scope is, OTL configuration.
So all the spin applications just start pushing
traces and spans into your OTL instances.
So I think the main thing there is
just going where the ecosystem already are, right?
Is where if you build a platform based
on Kubernetes,
there is a high likelihood that you have
some OTIF based monitoring system observability
system already.
So obviously these workloads just need to fit
into that ecosystem as easy as possible. And
again, taking it back to the developer experience
is just take some of those concerns away
because why? If we have a good enough
solution that solves for the 80, if not
even more use cases,
why even
make it your concern
from the get go, right? You get stuff
out of the box and obviously you could
be able to start implementing your own stance
and so on and so forth in the
code that you write, but really
out of the box you get all these
things where you can start just measuring
the execution time off your component and so
on and so forth and have that as
you know,
a thing you don't have to think about,
but it's just there. Makes sense. Awesome.
Yeah. All right, last question. What's next for
SPIN? Main thing right now is actually the
whole CNCF onboarding. It's quite a piece
of work getting it in, and it will
probably resolve in a four point zero, main
reason being we have to do breaking changes
of a bunch of namespaces and things in
there that were previously assigned with, or subject
with Fermion as a company, which will now
be, I think I have spinner spin framework,
I don't know, think the GitHub is called
spin framework now, where both spin and spin
kupil land, as there's a whole bunch of
work that we actually have to do to
wrap all of that up. But obviously,
Wasi three point zero is a little bit
of a way out in terms of timeline
for the specification,
but
our hope is that we'll be able to
contribute a snapshot of Wasi three in the
next release of Spin, and other than that,
I think we spend a lot of time
on really improving the JavaScript experience.
It would actually be more interesting to talk
about the JavaScript SDK version three and the
upcoming version four of JavaScript SDK,
but that could maybe be another episode.
But a lot have happened on the JavaScript
side to make that a much more pleasant
experience around Spin. Other than that, given it's
a CNCF project now everyone is able to
come and contribute to what the roadmap should
look like and their ideas and what they
would like to see from the framework.
So I highly encourage everyone to seek that
out and be part of it. Good luck
with that transition.
Thank It's
a good road to be on. It's a
long road, but it's a good road. It
definitely is. I mean, are we casting bets
on when the Linux Foundation launches the WebAssembly
Foundation? Because surely that's right around the corner.
There's a DevRel Foundation now, so why not
why not WebAssembly one? That makes more sense.
That's fair. That's fair. Dora, I'll cut out.
I'm not gonna mourn a bit on foundation
on this. I could. Alright. Any last questions,
Laura? No. It's just always good to hear
a little bit more about WebAssembly.
And I know just itching David's, oh, shiny
itch is always a good thing too. All
right. Then we'll give Michael a chance to
say goodbye. Do you have any parting words
or Anthony you'd like to share with our
audience?
Oh, thanks. Thanks for having me here. Thanks
for inviting me to come and talk about
WebAssembly.
It's always good to
see you guys in person. Thank you for
coming on. It's been good to Connor's right
around the corner. Oh yeah, that's true. That's
true. I will definitely be there. Also, there's
Wasserm.io
just the week before, so if you rather
go to Barcelona Thursday, Friday, and maybe stay
over the weekend, I'll definitely recommend coming to
Watson.io.
There you go. There you go. Really good.
Links in the show notes. I see you
in London
to everyone who listen. Thank you for joining
us. Thanks.
Thanks, folks.
Thanks for joining us. If you wanna keep
up with us, consider subscribing to the podcast
on your favorite podcasting app or even go
to CloudNativeCompass.fm.
And if you want us to talk with
someone specific or cover a specific topic, reach
out to us on any social media platform.
Until next time when Exploring the Cloud Native
Landscape
on 3. On 3. 1,
2,
3.
Don't forget your Don't forget your compass.